meet, too, with Mr. Wolf in Philadelphia.
We were talking about Edward Newton.
Edward Newton.
There were some people who didn't like him, thought he was a Bulgarian, but he really was a great book publicist, rare book publicist.
And he was a play actor, too.
He wore
black and white check suits and red ties so you couldn't miss them, and acted as though he had lived in London most of his life, quoted Johnson, Dr. Johnson, all the time, and put on a damn good act.
I found him interesting.
I saw his books.
His collection wasn't one of the greatest, but he was interesting, and he was an interesting man.
Did you know Harry Smith?
No, no.
There's another guy.
That's before my time.
But Newton is kind of before you.
No, I knew him the last years of his life.
He was suffering from a very painful cancer, and he moved out of his big house in Dalesford and took a suite at the Bellevue and was there.
This is, what, in the late 30s, very early 40s.
And I was working at Rosenbach's around the corner here.
He would go in at lunchtime, spend half an hour with him or something.
I couldn't really cheer him up, because all the news from England was bad, and he was feeling the pain.
But I got to know him fairly well.
Did he really know his books?
Well, he knew his own books, yes.
He was not in any sense, and I don't think ever pretended to be, a scholar, which is why some people said he was a Bulgarian.
Yes, he knew his folks.
Who would have called him a Bulgarian?
Oh, the people in town, yes.
But these were local people, isn't it?
Local people.
I have no doubt that people in England, too.
But, I think it was unfair.
Very definitely.
He certainly did a lot for book collecting.
He did a great deal for book collecting.
I can't agree that, you know, so many of his books, he did limitations, you know, sign limited.
Oh, well, but that's... You did that.
And also, while we're talking about Philadelphia book people, I guess we have to mention the Wideners, too.
Yes, well, that... I just knew Joe Widener enough to shake his hand about once or twice.
Yeah.
I brought his copy of the Gutenberg Bible in two volumes from his place in Elkins Park, put it in my car seat next to me for an exhibition at the Free Library.
What was this?
Oh, this was probably in 1940, I would guess.
I would have gone without knowing this story.
That's funny.
Well, there was a kind of... things were easier then.
People didn't worry.
How did you feel driving into town?
I don't know.
Well, you know, I picked up the tube.
I don't put in one seat.
I'd been used to handling pretty good books, you know.
And this is the way they agreed.
Today you'd have to insure the thing for $10 million.
Oh, it would be all racked up and everything.
These weren't wrapped up.
They just gave them to me, and I put them in the car.
Where did, uh, where did their Gutenberg go?
The Widener's?
To Harvard.
Harvard got it.
Oh.
Wasn't that something?
Yeah, yeah.
Well, great stuff.
You mentioned the Harry Widener story in the book, too.
Well, I'm told that story isn't true.
About the Bacon essays?
There's a slightly different thing.
I forget who wrote an article.
It was an article published.
I've seen it in at least three different places, including your book, New England.
Oh, yeah, sure.
But this is a story that was told everywhere.
But it's so wonderful, a story.
It's a good story, and it may have been true.
I think Quaritch did say that he bought us, it was not a first book.
No, it wasn't the first edition, anyway.
And he probably did, so he certainly must have bought a copy of the essays, Bacon's essays.
Whether or not he said, if I'm shipwrecked, it'll go with me.
That's the kind of apocrypha that becomes too charming to describe.
Yeah, but there was something about the whole business.
I remember reading the article and feeling, well, this person went into it in great depth.
And I don't remember what the upshot was.
You know, it's in Harvard University's book on the building of their library, though.
Well, I'm sure.
It was a story that was common.
Yeah.
But, I mean, even in their own publication, The Building of a Library, which Roger Stein gave me.
I've seen it in four places, at least.
Well, I'm sure.
I'm sure.
And it may have been true.
Somebody.
I'm going to use it.
I'll make every effort to disprove it.
Let's put it that way.
No, I don't think so.
It's a delightful story.
It's a great story.
Mark says in Books and Bitters that Had He Lived, Harry Widener would have been the greatest book collector the world has ever known.
That's a little press agentry going on there, don't you think, for the benefit of misunderstanding?
Well, that's considering that many, if not most of the books,
that were bought after his death, because his mother wanted to spend money in his memory, and she was willing to spend anything.
And she did not want her name tied in with it, either.
Tied in with it, no.
This was Harry's collection.
This was Harry's collection, a great collection.
No, it did.
Who knows?
The doctor was the agent for that, too.
It's a great story.
He was quite a character, wasn't he?
Rosenbach, in some...
He was more than a bookman, I guess.
Well, let me say this.
I think that Hans Krauss, as an example, was probably a better bookman than the doctor.
I think he may have had a wider, deeper knowledge of not all books, granted, but manuscripts and early books.
But, and sold.
Tremendous prices.
But people bought from them, but they didn't like them.
Crouse.
I don't know whether you can get Bill Scheide to talk to you about it.
I'm not going to talk to you about what he told me.
But the feeling is, yeah, sure.
You buy from Krauss because, by God, he's got the books.
But he isn't the kind of person that you're ever going to be a great friend of.
On the other hand, the people who bought from the doctor, Lessing, Arthur Houghton, the Hides, Harry Wadner, so forth and so forth, were good friends.
Yeah.
Shidey, you mentioned Shidey.
That is almost unprecedented where you have
Three generations.
Book collecting really is not normally a hereditary thing.
That's right.
I wonder, and I guess each shiny has had a different interest.
Well, the first shiny really wasn't a rare book collector.
I mean, not.
But he started it.
He started it.
Certainly, he made the fortune that enabled it.
Oh, that's right.
Well, there was oil.
There was oil.
He went out west, western Pennsylvania.
That's what they say.
Titusville.
Just let me identify.
We're talking with Leslie Morris at the Rosenbach Library, 10th January, 1999.
Good.
I'm sorry.
What are you talking about?
Well, I'm not as familiar with the current American collectors as I might be.
Not being in New York, it's kind of hard to keep in touch with a lot of these things.
Certainly, the market has taken off.
I don't know if that means that book collecting has taken off.
That's kind of what happened prior to 1929, too, when you had people who
who really knew nothing, or even worse, cared nothing for books.
David Redden at Southviews in New York feels that we are now embarked in a great golden age.
Ed thinks that's ridiculous.
I'd give myself.
Well, because he said, all right, so the money that is being paid is quite impressive.
Redden also argues that, well, not just the money,
not just the fact that institutions aren't getting them.
Institutions don't have the money, and the benefactor doesn't have the tax incentive that he once had.
But he doesn't really feel that you have the volume of books that are available.
I mean, Henry Huntington went out and bought it.
And in seven years, seven years, you know, put together a truly world-class library.
Wolff says, well, I don't care how much money you have, could you get a full run of Shakespeare quartos?
No, you couldn't.
And then John Van Horn said, I don't even think you could get a full run-up Richard's Almanac.
Well, they certainly can't have our unique copy, so no.
Well, they had it once and they don't have it.
So, yeah, there's an argument.
Now, this is an interesting assignment for Book Woman, I guess.
To work here?
Yeah.
Yes.
I had worked at the University of Chicago for a couple of years before I came here.
And I wasn't really all that familiar with Dr. Rosenbach, I have to admit.
But I find that being here and working so much with the Rosenbach Company archive, which I've kind of made my pet project to get that into usable condition as a research collection.
We've finally finished cataloging the correspondence and cataloging now our auction catalog collection to make it into something that's usable
to investigate book selling in the early 20th century, since he was so important.
And I find that, you know, we have all of these connections to other places, because Dr. Rosenbach handled so much material in his time.
Talk to me a little bit about that.
That is fascinating.
Well, we are such a small institution, and we are very much a collector's collection, so that as for, to call ourselves a research library, we don't really have that many collections that support in-depth research.
We have the Marianne Moore papers, which are probably the most published.
And another room full of books and manuscripts.
We have the Rush family papers, an important Philadelphia family.
And then we have the Rosenbach Company archive, which, before I was here, was never really considered as a research resource.
It was all together in one little room.
It was an old, the same filing cabinets it had been in for years.
people had organized little parts of it and then become discouraged with it.
And it was very difficult to find out anything.
I became, I've always been interested in the movement of books, and who has owned books before, and where have they been, and who has used them, I suppose, being a librarian, it's a kind of natural interest.
Or it has proven out of it.
Yes, I mean, I've become, it's almost like being Seymour de Ricci reincarnated, I sometimes feel, you know, I say, oh yes, well that book was, so it's, yeah.
Have you done some things on that?
Well, I've done these two exhibitions.
Do you have catalogs on it?
I think you got sent the first one.
I got the Redux one, I think.
Yeah, and I know that Ellen had meant to send you this one, which was the first one.
Okay, I heard that.
We'll certainly see that you get a copy before you go.
So you did both of these?
Mm-hmm.
And since I did the first one, everyone was like,
what an interesting idea for an exhibition.
It's like doing it backwards.
You had the books once, and now you don't.
But it makes us connected with all of these different libraries.
It gives us an opportunity to bring in material that we wouldn't have to exhibit ourselves, but that has a connection with us.
Do you think that this is an institution in search of its focus?
No, not its focus, but its function, shall we say.
Well, I think
I don't think so anymore.
I think up until about five years ago that might have been the case.
It's very difficult being both a house museum and a library to balance those two sides of your personality.
And I think we've managed to do it fairly well in the last few years.
And I think it's good that we try to do that because certainly working with museum people you're aware of a different set of issues than you are simply working with librarians.
Certainly our exhibition program is much more fully developed than any research library of this size.
I mean, that's what drives this institution, is exhibitions and public education.
Among dealers, Rosenbach is really, I certainly would never call him unique.
Dealers, as a rule, aren't supposed to be perceived as also being collectors.
I collect.
and if my dealer is also collecting the same author that I am, then you might say, well, he's keeping the best stuff for himself.
Oh, he's going to make the price too dear for me.
And dealers will just tell you that.
He, however, on the other hand, seems to be one who really succeeded in having the most extraordinary clients and yet building a phenomenal library.
And Wolf says, well, he used it to his advantage.
He would say, well, if you don't buy it,
I'm going to keep it for myself.
This is kind of an interesting question.
Although there are a lot of things that he did price way too high.
Do you think he priced some things too high because he didn't want to sell them?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
And some things never even were offered.
The Baysom book that he decided to keep for himself that he got from Ireland, he never offered that for sale.
Well, there's a wonderful story about how he got that.
Yes, yes.
This person wrote him.
It said 150 pounds or something.
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
And that was not the greatest bass soundbook.
Oh, no, no, it's imperfect.
I mean, it locks the title page in the first few leaves.
The one that went to Yale, I guess.
Well, and that's a big story behind it, too.
That's another story, too.
And I asked Edwin about that this morning, and he said, you know, I showed this to a guy named Yale, and I forget his name, Babb or something.
Yeah, James Babb.
And he thought that...
Edwin was giving too much of Fleming's story, you know, not enough of the other story.
Yale really doesn't come out looking too good out of that.
No.
Regardless of how it plays.
Well, you know, I think it was just, it's a story that illustrates how times really had changed.
That in the past, if Rosenbach had done that, bidding for Huntington or Fulcher, they would have screamed and kicked about it.
They would have taken it.
Would have written a check.
And an institution...
I can't do that.
Except that they have such affluent benefactors, and there was a woman who kind of... Mrs. Harkness said she would put it out there and backed off.
I mean, I think there's a lot that was never told about what exactly went on.
Your background, you said you came from Chicago, but you weren't really involved in book selling or...?
No, I had a two-year internship with Bob Rosenthal in Special Collections there.
Through him, I went to England for a year to work for some booksellers, and then went to the University of Leeds and got another master's degree in bibliography and textual criticism, and then came back here and got this child.
So you brought your scholarly baggage to the world of book collecting.
I mean, had you ever even thought of collectors in the world as collectors?
Not collecting as such before I came here, no.
But working here, it's something that's inescapable.
Yeah, it's something, isn't it?
You have a feel for what motivates people to spend extraordinary amounts of money for paper.
I'm not a book collector myself.
I mean, I don't have the bug.
I mean, I buy books that are useful for my own writing and my own work, but I've never had that, you know,
been bitten by the collecting bug.
So I tend to take more of a historian's view towards it about, you know, what it tells you about people and the times that they lived in, more than from a sense of personal understanding of collecting, I think.
Having been through the Rosenberg archives, Edwin did indicate that there were a number of things that he didn't have access to because they were in New York.
I think they were plumbing.
Yes, that's kind of an interesting story.
When John Fleming bought the business from the trustees of the foundation back in 1955, he retained all of the New York records, all of the stock books, and all of the stock cards.
So what we had here was really not, it was only half the story, and for say about 1927 on, not really the important part of the story, because the business really did move to New York in the 20s.
It had to, because that's where people went through.
They didn't come to Philadelphia.
And without the stock cards, you had no easy way of indexing the collection.
And there were a lot of things you simply couldn't find out.
Once Fleming died and the executors decided to give all of that back to us, I mean, we had no idea how much was there.
Because you would go up to New York to talk to John about a project, and he would vanish.
and then reappear with the Kunze Collection catalog.
How long have you been with Rosenbach?
Almost six years now.
Really?
Yeah.
What do you think would assist me in getting some kind of insight into Rosenbach?
Well, I think the biography is invaluable because it does give you this overview of the life.
Well, I would recommend reading, say, the correspondence with Sotheby in the company archives.
That was Seymour de Ricci and Sean Leslie, who were both very important as book scouts for Rosenbach.
Who used scouts?
Well, he never really called them that.
They were good friends.
It was kind of an unspoken relationship.
And certainly the Huntington correspondence and the Folger correspondence, his big customers, just to see how persuasive he could be is interesting.
Is there anything revealing about Huntington, for instance, as a collective, the style?
Well, it certainly becomes very clear how omnivorous he was.
I mean, when you just look at the list of things that Rosenbach would send out.
But did he deal directly with Huntington or with staff?
For the most part, with Huntington, although as he got more ill, he did deal with the librarian more.
And after Huntington's death, really, the relationship stopped completely.
The Huntington Library bought next to nothing from the Rosenbach Company after Henry Huntington died.
Really?
I'm wondering whether Huntington is a true collector or an accumulator.
Well, Donald Dickinson, have you spoken to him?
No.
He's working on a biography of Huntington.
He's the one who wrote this.
Is he in Arizona?
Yes, this Dictionary of American Book Collectors he put together.
Nicholas Barker, as well as he was looking at.
Do you know how to get in touch with him?
I don't know.
You just write to him at the University of Irvine.
When was this book published?
Did you publish this?
No.
It's our book plate.
That came out in 87, 88, maybe 88.
Greenwood Press is out of the... In Connecticut.
No, no, this is a new accumulation.
Carl Cannon had done an earlier book on American book collectors, but this is much more kind of a dictionary format.
Okay, we should be able to get this one going.
Greenwood Press, out of Westport, right?
How old is Dickinson?
A young fellow?
I think around 40.
I don't remember if I've ever actually met him.
Do you know what department he's in down there?
I think they have a library science department.
Hi.
Hi, Nick.
Ellen Dunlap.
Good to see you.
Talking to a lesson here about the Rosenberg.
She's the one who knows.
He just talked to Edwin this morning.
I had a stimulating morning with Edwin.
He talks about anything.
It's just wonderful.
It's not necessarily knows all, sees all, fails all, by any means.
By no means.
But tantalizing...
it comes across with a very characteristic flavor.
Now, look, you people just don't, you know, know what I know, and I've been there, and he's that way to the younger of us, and he is, he's had what he calls kindergarten ever since, I guess he started out.
five years ago or so.
Kindergarten.
And we would go out, this is before we moved into town, and he would have some of us out to his house in Chestnut Hill on Saturday or Sunday morning.
And Mary would be away playing Contract Bridge or at some aerobics festival or whatever she was doing.
This is his wife.
His wife.
We would talk books and fundraising and gossip and bibliography and the old days.
It started out very much as kind of a, come sit by my side and I will tell you how to run your library.
We all beautifully took notes and all that.
As we each cut our own teeth and started making our own mistakes and having our own successes or whatever, it became
more and more a reminiscence session for him, which was perfectly fine.
And he's done so much for all of us, getting us our jobs and pushing us in one way, goading us into one thing or the other.
Well, you're in Philadelphia, and it's a process that John Van Horset, being here, we like that maybe you didn't take him for granted, you know.
He's a major.
Well, it's a little bit different for John, because obviously Edwin's a hard act to follow.
Edwin is an impossible act to follow.
And not only that, he's there.
He's there.
And also... I mean, we had to interrupt our interview at 11.
I don't know what the call was, but it was a call that he had to take, and that he had to do the talking on it, and then John came in and spoke with me.
I have no idea what this was, but...
Clearly, he's more than an emeritus guy coming in for two hours a day or three days a week.
He must be involved in things.
I think it may have been something, you know, extracurricular or something.
John doesn't let anyone learn anything over there.
But John, and John, see, John doesn't come from the world of rare books or bibliography for the most part either.
So he's a little bit outside, John's a little bit outside the kindergarten circle because it's a lot harder to sit at the,
of your predecessor and looked at him with such grandfatherly eyes.
Especially the guy with, you know, the biography of Rosenbach and the Logan book.
I think that's why Leslie has been in kind of a tough position, but she's done it admirably, because Edwin, I've always said Edwin, Edwin never lets the facts stand in the way of a good story.
I got him to back off the story today.
He will.
The one about Harry Widener going down with the Bacon Essays?
Uh-huh.
And, you know, he said, well, I'll take this with me.
If I'm shipwrecked, it'll go down with me.
It's a wonderful story.
And then, of course, he does die in a Titanic.
And Edwin said, well, you know, that's not, I'm not so sure that's true.
I said, it's in your book.
A lot of things in the book.
Leslie's been going through all of this stuff with the fine-tooth book, and she finds lots of things that aren't exactly the way Edwin told him.
And to rewrite Rosenbach's history as she was doing is very wrong.
I have personally found a number of things that I will quietly correct in the book.
You know, the general tone of it is absolutely right.
But, I mean, if you just take a look at some of the volume of material he had to deal with, I mean, there are lots of little things that he simply did not have the time to verify and to check.
I have four things, and they're all little things.
But they're things.
That happens to be one.
To me, I think it's a wonderful story, and it's apocryphal, and it's nice.
And if it's not true, it ought to be true.
But there were other little things, like on the details of Harry Widenst telling something to Edwin Newton on, when my time comes, there'll be nothing left to me.
Well, Edwin has it being told after wholesale, which
It was perfect, but it didn't happen that way.
According to Newton, I went to Newton's book and found a different version of it.
It's really no big deal.
But as scholars, you know, I mean, you'd like to get it right.
Edwin did not start, yeah.
I mean, Edwin did not start working for the resume coming until 1930, after a lot of these things had taken place.
And he heard it from Dr. Rosenbach.
He was a bigger storyteller than Edwin ever was.
He'd sit out here and have two or three or four drinks.
Right.
A few cigars.
And I think that to cope, so not only in retelling these Rosenbach tales that Leslie's been doing in her two catalogs, you have not only the facts to deal with, but also the whole flavor, the timbre of what Edwin is doing.
is conveying, and it's so pure Rosenbachian.
It's very hard to, I think Lester's done a great job of making it just as lively a story.
I don't want to put you on the spot, and I won't, and my book is going to be a very good-spirited book, for the most part.
I'll talk to you about a few other stories that I'm working on.
It's Garden Sale, which is another thing altogether.
Do you know anything about that?
Bizarre catalogs in the entire world.
Well, they're the most bizarre people in the whole world.
Yes.
I'll go off and tell you some stuff.
I think I will do a chapter on a Shady family library.
That is one, perhaps the only great instance of generational collecting.
Yes, and it's very unusual for collecting to be handed down in a family.
It isn't done.
It's like it's sold off.
You know, I've told my wife, she claims to love my books.
I know that if I go and you can get three grand for this sign of Parker, you'd be a fool not to do it.
Well, I know you're always looking for sources.
I don't know if he would talk or what he knows, but Gordon Marshall, who is the assistant librarian's library company, is married to Bill Shirey's daughter.
Really?
She's supposed to be the fourth generation.
I have understood that there's a daughter who lives in Moores.
is licking its chops that it's going to get this library, but not as long as it remains with the family.
Well, Gordon Marshall and his wife's family believe that they live in Morristown, not Morristown.
In O.R., actually.
Yeah, in O.R., yeah.
Pennsylvania?
Yeah, no, New Jersey, which is just east of here, other than the Morristown.
And Gordon Marshall.
It's interesting that he's involved in books.
And he's more kind of like chief of operations over there than involved with the bibliographical stuff.
I've already talked to Bill Stoneman.
He's the librarian.
How do you pronounce it?
Shitey?
Shitey.
Bill has not been there too long.
He took Janet E.'
's place, but I think he was.
It's great.
I have every book dealer in America trying to find this book for me.
Look at that.
For Dr. R. This is a shitey library.
And it's inscribed.
For Dr. R. with my affection and esteem, both unqualified.
Julian, January 15, 30, 48.
Yeah, this...
This is the only book on record, you know, of this library.
The correspondence is very interesting, too.
The correspondence?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
I actually spent some time quite profitably here, do you think?
Looking through some of your things at some point?
Well, I think that especially after you know kind of you've done a lot of the footwork already, I think that there's
I wouldn't think that you would want to start work here, but I think it would fill in a lot of things.
It's not comprehensive enough to be a good place to begin.
This is not going to be a scholarly.
I'm really looking for good stories.
Well, about the Scheidtys, there's this story about Dr. Rosenbach for a Christmas present for Mr. Scheidtys.
sold this incredible... Which Mr. Scheide is?
This was William Scheide.
This is Mr. Scheide's father.
The one who inscribed that book?
No, no, no, that's Julian Boyd.
That's Julian Boyd.
Oh, I'm sorry.
That Mr. Scheide's sister was married with Mrs. Caldwell, of Caldwell's Jewelers in Philadelphia.
And she wanted a Christmas present for her brother.
So she...
came into the Rosenbach Company just before Christmas, and there was this very expensive incumulable, I can't remember which one it was at the moment, that Dr. Rosenbach had already tried to sell to William Scheide, and Scheide had said, that's too much.
Scheide is one of the very few people who does turn down books for Dr. Rosenbach's autism because he thinks they're too expensive.
So when Mr. Scheide's sister comes in, Dr. Rosenbach sells it to her.
She gives it to William Shady for Christmas, and he goes up the wall and writes this two-page letter to Dr. Who is in the back saying that this was simply not the right thing to do, and how dare you sell my sister this book.
I thought it was overpriced, and then you sold it to her to give to me, and it's simply unfair.
It's really a very good one.
That's a great story.
They just did business then, sir.
No, actually, I wasn't too smart, I think.
He said, I'm going to keep it, but I just, you know, this is better to never happen again.
Did they do business again?
Oh, yeah.
No big deal.
Well, they didn't have the books that he wanted.
Have you learned anything about Rosenbach since you've been here as a person, or that you don't know, that you don't get out of the book?
that you don't get out of the book.
I think the only thing has to do with kind of the early relationship between the two brothers, which isn't really dealt with in the biography.
Edwin never liked Philip, and that does come across quite clearly in the biography.
He told me, in fact, that he's written a piece like that.
Have you read the piece?
Where is it, you know?
It's not published anywhere.
No, it's in his word process.
It's part of his reminiscence to it.
But you have access to that?
Well, he asked me to read it.
Oh.
That's interesting.
But in the early years, I mean, the picture in the biography is that Phillips was, you know, kind of this dominating man who had no taste.
A mania to self, is the phrase.
Right.
Sometimes most have a mania to acquire.
He had the mania.
He uses that word, a mania to self.
And that Dr. Rosenbach was pushed around by Phillips.
And that was probably true in the later years.
But in the earlier years, there was very much, they were pretty much on equal footing.
And Philip listened to what Dr. Rosenbach had to say about how to sell saying the same, and followed his advice.
I think even worse, he paints him as something of a philistine.
I mean, with no taste.
Well, really, the guy didn't know anything about... Philip never really developed an expertise.
In fact, he said the phrase he used.
I think that in many ways their personalities and the sense of the business and all were a very good combination.
I don't get too much of an exaggeration compared to Dr. Oden and I probably wouldn't have sold anything.
You would have become like Uncle Mo and Fatima and his dusty book.
Philip and the bottom line was a healthy thing for Dr. R to spur him on.
So I think that, in some ways, Edwin Plank's a very good-brother, bad-brother kind of picture, which makes for a compelling meaning.
It's an oversimplification.
take pains to point out that, by the way, the doctor was earned.
That was an earned doctorate, which is, you know, every horse's ass can get a given, pardon my phrase, but... Well, he had his honorary doctorate.
Yeah, but I don't think he would have allowed himself, who knows, to be called Doc Doctor if it was that.
I don't think so, but I think there is no denying the fact that Philip tried lots of things to make money that did not work until he took the shredder into the business.
And I say also, he was responsible for many more busts even after they were in partnership with him.
So I think it is interesting in continuing to evolve relationships.
Do you think I could spend a few, not today, but a profitable three or four hours here?
Well, yeah.
Well, I mean, but not much more than that.
I'm just trying to find a couple of good portable things to, you know, realistically, I don't see Rosenberg getting more than 10 pages in my book if he gets that.
But it would really be nice to get something that nobody else has used prior to it.
Well, I think that he's central to the story in a couple of ways.
I don't need the PR pitch on why you would include it before he wrote it.
You don't need PR.
You don't need it.
But it's not only because you look at sales like the Dovini sales, and so many
seminal collections and see how responsible the Rosenbach Company was in forming those collections and to realize how many of the important books that came into this country came through their hands.
But even more importantly, it's because the legends, the lore, are so inherently part of what book collecting was done.
So I think for both fact and fiction, these figures
Would it be possible for me to get a copy of that Scheide letter?
Yeah, well, I'll look it up.
I will be writing about the Scheide letter.
There will be a Voyager show, did you know that?
No.
I think later this month, we're going to have to build stones.
The Voyager club is going to have an exhibit on it in 25 years.
You told me I would be invited to a reception for the China Library at the Golden Club.
There may be a small reception.
Something, yeah.
Which I desperately want to go to, obviously.
I'll have to look at it.
I don't even know that I have my schedule for you.
I'll just check for you, OK?
There is a, the next big exhibition that's opening is the Women's Office.
And I've already talked to Ruth Mortimer.
I don't even think they have it finalized.
They don't.
I just like Marie.
Who's Marie now?
Marie Corey.
K-O-R-E-Y.
Where's she?
Well, right now, she's at me and Beth can find a dress to get married in three weeks.
Where does she work?
She is the outgoing head of the liberal department of the underwear.
Right here?
Right here.
She and I was a chief collaborator on the legacy that she was done.
I was scared for that.
And Marie is... Where would I reach Marie here at the Free Library?
She's at home.
I don't mean this minute.
I mean I thought I'd call tomorrow or Friday.
She's at home packing all week long.
So she's leaving.
She's marrying Richard Landon, the head of the Fisher Rivers Library in Toronto.
Book people stick together, don't they?
So she's moving to Canada.
She's moving to Canada at the end of this month.
I'll stick with me, Penny.
She's only 35 miles away.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
She'll be easier to try.
She'll have her mind more on books, including books in boxes.
Now, let's talk generally.
Here we have two young, capable, talented, highly
trained, and did have much spoken, young women, and this must be an unusual kind of assignment.
You came from Texas to the Rosenbach.
How many volumes do we have here, roughly?
20,000 volumes.
Roughly, that's a small collection, right?
27,000 volumes.
And last week I was in the University of Chicago.
Right.
I mean, there's something great about having a small collection.
I'm looking for statements like that.
I mean, you know, I can say that I have handled just about everything in this collection, physically.
And certainly you could never say that about being lived at Texas or the University of Chicago.
I mean, it's just impossible.
And the longer you're here, the more you are able to understand about it, because it is a
Because it is small, and you can take on a project and know that you can actually finish it, because it's not at some, you know, tremendously large institution where everything catalogs seems like a hopeless plan.
Okay, having handled everything, virtually everything, do you feel that you understand the focus, the scheme of the collection?
Oh, I think it's very easy to understand the focus of the collection, the collector's collection.
Well, is it a Highspot collection?
It's a Highspot collection, with the exception that I mentioned before when I was talking about us as a research library.
And that... Yeah, but I don't think he had that in mind.
Well, you have to understand that the Rosenbach collection is not just Dr. Rosenbach's collection.
In fact, very little of it was ever Dr. Rosenbach's own personal collection.
Dr. Rosenbach died, and then Phillips died a year later, the trustees selected from Rosenbach Company's stock what they wanted to go into what was then the Rosenbach Foundation.
And so to say that a particular book was part of Dr. Rosenbach's collection, I mean, I know how to find that, but I think until a few years ago, the distinctions were not very apparent even to people who worked here.
And also, Dr. Rosenbach had others.
The books that were here, that were his, you know, close to his, really close to his art kind of books, were Americana books.
And his other special personal collecting interests, like the children's books, he gave to the free library.
And he's Judaica.
I mean, he... Was it a Judaica?
The American Jewish Historical Society.
That's right.
He sold a silent trench.
Yes, another Rosenbach story, in which we were involved, because we were the only people who had... Tell me, tell me, tell me.
I'm starting a chapter with that.
Oh, my gosh.
We need to talk to Peter Solis-Cohen as well.
I don't know if you've talked ahead.
I know Lita.
Peter is Lita's nephew-in-law.
He took the Solacellas name, but he was not a Solacellas name.
She told me that.
Oh, they all take great names.
You know, he's not really a Solacellas.
He's the one who kind of took on the historical authority about all of this, because some Solace Cohen family stuff had been told as well.
Well, there's an interesting... I mean, the guy bought this thing with the express idea that he hated it.
That's right.
And that's the justification.
That's why I'm looking at this.
This really kind of opens up the whole area.
Who collects the unspeakable things, the Holocaust stuff, the Ku Klux Klan stuff, as horrible as it is in order to not, you know, somebody has to keep it to preserve it, because one of my pieces is the collector is more than an accumulator, a true collector, preserves stuff, you know, at some point.
Well, Rosenwald had Rosenbach purchase it.
with that in mind.
He also said that's the only time I ever told the doctor that price is no object.
Buy it.
Well, he only had to pay 4K for it.
But, you know, he never said that with the Gutenberg Bible.
He must have had a price how high he was willing to go.
It was an auction.
It was an auction in Europe.
But he said he wanted it, and then he did not want it to go into the wrong hands.
He didn't even want to keep it for himself.
No, he didn't want anything.
But why did he buy it?
Well, to keep it out of the hands of the Nazis.
It's an interesting collecting story, isn't it?
And I think he just wanted it to be seen in context.
And that's why it went not into his own personal collection, but to the Jewish Historical Society.
That's the best yet.
Where it won't be kind of plucked out and held up as this anti-Semitic text.
Which it was.
Which it was, but it could be viewed in the context of all of this other... We're talking about the murder of children here.
Ritual murder, you know, of child names.
We needed two sentences out of this to... But given those times, you know, this was just all... Listen, we've got a story up in Boston about the guy who...
Oh, yeah.
It's not just Boston.
Well, I mean, the whole white community went berserk over this as, well, they should, you know.
But these things happen.
But I think that... How did you become involved in this thing before we generalize?
Oh, God.
Well, everyone was trying to find out.
I mean, from... My understanding is that the American Jewish Historical Society
didn't even really know how it came to be there, or what the reason was that they had it.
They knew that they had to wait until a certain date, and then they sold it.
And they didn't even wait that long.
They didn't, well, it was close, I mean, a few weeks.
And Lessing Rosenwald
writes about it in his reminiscences of a collector.
I cannot find that book.
Well, it's right over there.
Can you at least show me what the book looks like?
Sure.
It's black and a slip stitch.
That is a very difficult book to find.
There is material in the files about this.
Did he actually, was he correct that he gave the doctor a, this has never been read, do you know that?
No, it wouldn't have to.
I've read it.
Look at it, it's, it's... We wash our hands.
It's a beautifully done book.
There's not a whole lot of content to it.
I mean, you don't really go to it to find out.
It's not that old a book.
Why cannot I find a copy of this?
It's very, I mean, it was privately distributed.
And when you've got any grandchildren at Blessing Reginald, that's a big part of the press run, I think.
I'm surprised that nobody... Chincintown.
Elberthorpe.
That was the name of the gallery, and the Elberthorpe Gallery was where the art and the books were passed.
What was the limitation of this?
Do we know offhand?
250 copies.
I'm sure the Rosenwald family still has a lot of them.
Wouldn't you think?
I don't know.
I don't know how they distributed them.
Where is the Rosenwald family?
Well, Edith, a blessing's widow, died a year ago, two days after Christmas.
And her son, Julius Dooley Rosenwald, is the executor of the estate.
And there are...
A number of Westingian youth children are still around here, but Dooley is the one that we have the most contact with.
And his son-in-law, Werner Bootsheimer, is the director of the Folger Shakespeare Library.
It's almost incestuous as well.
Well, this is, we're going up in directions I never dreamed that we were going to .
Well, we were talking about, you know, what, you know, we're trying to make the collection usable in such a way that it answers questions like this, about book collectors and collections.
Well.
And I think that in some ways, I mean, coming from such a broad collection as Texas, one might think, oh, this is so confining because
You know, it's so much smaller and so much more limited in some way.
But the fact that it is all centered around such a very large image of a man or of these brothers gives it a kind of a cohesion.
And it's not like a small collection put together by two people who didn't matter or that
included materials that only mattered to them.
I mean, how can you be unexcited about the manuscript of Ulysses or the Faison book or, you know, or all these things?
I mean, this is that string of pearls that I've got to do that.
Yeah, give me that quote again.
He denies it, but I told people when I first came here, when they asked me, you know, coming from Texas here,
What's it like my husband said to someone?
At Texas, it was like Ellen was dealing with the whole bottom of the ocean floor, you know, the wrecked ships and sunken treasure and just all kinds of unmined strange fish.
Very strange fish, a few sea monsters and so on.
But at Rosenbach, it's just like a string of pearls.
Perfect pearls, isn't it?
No, no.
And there are some things that have a nicer path than others, but I think that in general... And it's not, to me, it's all so interconnected.
I mean, you call it incestuous, but the world of scholarship is of making connections.
And I can't tell you how often...
I see people here that I knew in Texas, you know, there were search paths, crosses, back and forth, criss-crosses around through all these collections.
Well, I was telling Leslie that it's amazing.
I really know there comes a point where I really have to see somebody when two or three different people mention their names to me.
You know, for instance, this guy at Arizona.
Nicholas Barker came from Worcester at the Antiquarian Society.
He says, you really got to see this guy, Dickinson, in Arizona.
He's doing a biography of Huntington.
So I sit right down to me while I'm calling for ten people a week and talking to them, setting up as many of these scripts as I can.
And now you do it again.
I ask you about Huntington.
He says, oh, this guy, Dickinson.
Is that the guy in Arizona?
I asked you.
He said, yes.
I said, you're the second one.
You know, these names.
Now, this is Nicholas Barker from England telling me about a guy in Arizona who knows
as much as there is to know about Huntington.
Well, and Dickinson is just very much on.
I mean, he really is kind of in the peak of this research and turning over the stones.
I gather there's probably a lot of other people who know a lot about Huntington.
Well, I'm not competitive in any way to what he's doing.
I'm looking, you know, for five or six pages on the guy.
But something that would really profile him
other than what you get from the Huntington Library.
It's wonderful.
I saw one quote in a book about his art collecting.
Somebody said, oh God, that he owned every judge and everybody else in California.
Have you ever seen that quote?
No, not surprising.
I mean, the guy, what he didn't have, he bought.
And he married his uncle's wife.
Did he know his books?
Again, to go back, I think that came in context.
I asked if he... Whether he was an accumulator or a collector.
Or did he know his books?
How could he possibly?
He had a whole staff in New York, even just... Some of them were never unpacked.
Some of them were never even unpacked.
He just wanted to put together a great collection, and that's what counted.
I mean, he did put together a book collection, and he didn't choose, you know.
Well, they probably hired some wonderful people, too, if that helps.
Well, Huntington, before Dr. Rosenbach, had his agent, George D. Smith, I'm not sure if the name was one of the four.
And really, if Smith had not died when he did, the question of whether Rosenbach would have become the dealer that he became... That's in the book, but I mentioned that to Edwin this morning.
I said you'd point out that
One of the luckiest things to happen to the doctor's career was that Smith died when he did.
He has a letter in the book.
I forget who he wrote.
You know, I would like to be your dealer now.
You know, I'm sure I'll... We'll be happy to execute any of your questions.
And I'm sure that they jumped on the band right now.
At some point, I want to talk about Texas.
I hear your arrival may be anticipated.
What do you hear?
I don't know if this is really...